St. Petersburg State University

Czar Peter the Great founded St. Petersburg University as part of a new and complete system of science and education in Russia. The system was comprised of three institutions: the Russian Academy of Sciences, the University, and the Academic Gymnasium. In a decree of 28 January, 1724, the Senate outlined the purposes of the new institution: “The University is a gathering of learned persons to teach youth such noble sciences as Theology, Law, Medicine, and Philosophy as we know them today.”

Prominent men of learning were among the University’s first professors, mathematicians Euler and Bernoulli, for example. The famous historian and ethnographer, Academician Miller, was appointed in 1747 to be the University’s first rector, a newly created position. The great Russian scholar Mikhail Lomonosov made a significant contribution to the development of the University. He was the University's rector from 1758 to 1765 and taught at the school for a number of years. Lomonosov here introduced the first physics course in Russian in 1747.

In the late eighteenth century teaching at the University came to a virtual standstill. The Academic Gymnasium still taught students as late as 1804. Its last students were then transferred to the Pedagogical Institute, formerly the Teachers’ Seminary which had opened in 1783. The Pedagogical Institute then grew to replace the University as an institution of higher learning. It was used as the base for a revived St. Petersburg University in 1819 when Czar Alexander I issued a decree proclaiming the re-establishment of St. Petersburg University.

The re-established University had three faculties: the Faculty of History and Philology, the Faculty of Philosophy and Law (later the Faculty of Law), and the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics. The Faculty of Oriental Languages was added in 1854. The University retained this structure until 1918.

The second half of the nineteenth century saw the development in the University of a number of world-famous schools of science. Among the University professors who founded them were Chebyshev in mathematics, Lenz in physics, Mendeleev and Butlerov in chemistry, Beketov in botany, Mechnikov and Kovalevsky in embryology, Sechenov in physiology,

Dokuchaev in soil sciences, Inostrantsev in geology, Bestuzhev-Ryumin in history, and Vasilyev and Rosen in oriental studies.

Several learned societies were founded during the same period. The creation of the Natural Scientist Society in 1868 was followed by Mendeleev’s Russian Chemical Society (1869), the Philological, Anthropological, and Historical Societies, the Botanical Garden and the Astronomical Observatory. The Chemical Society grew to become the Russian Chemical Institute. It was at St. Petersburg University that the first wireless transmitter was tested in 1895 by its inventor, Popov. The Physics Institute, the first physics school in Russia, was opened in 1901.

Many famous cultural figures were educated at the school. Among them were classical poets and writers Turgenev, Nekrasov, Blok, Mandelshtam, Andreev, Gumilyov, great classical composers and musicians Glinka, Stravinsky, Glazunov, Mravinsky, and artists Vrubel, Rerikh, Benua, Dobuzhinsky. Theater directors and actors were also part of the University's student community. The list includes such names as Dyagilev, Kachalov, Bryantzev and others.

The University developed rapidly in the 1920s. Several departments grew into whole new faculties. The Faculties of Geography, Geology, and Biology, for example, developed from their respective departments. The Department of Physics and Mathematics gave rise both to the Faculty of Physics and to the Faculty of Mathematics and Mechanics. More new departments and research institutes were created until, in 1941, the University consisted of 10 faculties and 7 research institutes.

The University continued its normal operations throughout the first winter of the siege of Leningrad, despite the hardships, but it was evacuated to Saratov in the spring of 1942. A small group of the University's staff remained in Leningrad, however, to watch over the University library, the science collections and equipment. The Second World War was not yet over when the University opened its 1944 academic year.

In the 1960s, the Faculty of Psychology, the Faculty of Journalism, the Faculty of Applied Mathematics and Control Processes, and a number of new departments were established. The same period saw the construction of a campus for the faculties of the natural sciences in the vicinity of Stary Peterhof.

Today St. Petersburg State University is organized into 24 science and humanities faculties. The science faculties are the Faculties of Applied Mathematics and Control Processes, Biology and Soil Sciences, Chemistry, Geography and Geo-ecology, Geology, Mathematics and Mechanics,
Medicine, and Physics. The humanities faculties are: the Faculties of Economics, Journalism, Applied Communications, History, Political Studies, International Relations, Law, Military Studies, Oriental Studies, Philology, Philosophy, Psychology, Sociology and Higher School of Management.

Some faculties are quite new. In 1989, the Faculty of Sociology developed from the Department of Applied Sociology at the Faculty of Economics. It is now a leading center in the discipline in the Russian Federation, providing courses ranging from general sociology to mathematical methods in social analysis. The Faculty of Management, opened in 1993 to those interested in contemporary business management theory and practice, resulted from a collaboration between the St. Petersburg State University Faculty of Economics and the University of California Haas School of Management. The Faculty of International Relations, established in 1994, trains students in political studies, international economics, philosophy, diplomacy, and international law.

St. Petersburg State University provides higher education both on a non-paying and commercial basis. Admission to the University is by national exam results. The University is in session from September 1 until late June, with the academic year divided into fall and spring semesters. At the end of each semester, undergraduate students take examinations. The University provides students from areas outside St. Petersburg with accommodation in its dormitories.

St. Petersburg State University offers courses to be taken either full-time, part-time, or by correspondence at both undergraduate and graduate levels. All University faculties offer both non-paying and commercial 4-year Bachelor’s Degree programs and non-paying and commercial Master’s Degree programs. They also provide a free 3-year graduate program leading to the Candidate Degree (the equivalent of Ph.D. in the U.S.A.).

The University also provides students with the possibility of an additional undergraduate degree in a field other than that of their first degree. This so-called second degree of higher education is offered on a commercial basis and is taught by the University Special Faculties.

To assist university instructors in improving their professional skills, the University Further Education Faculty arranges in-service courses.

The University occupies over 100 buildings on its three main campuses and in individual facilities around the city of St. Petersburg and in its environs. The main campus is located in the center of the city on Vasilyevsky Island. It includes a number of faculties and research institutes
as well as the university main building which houses the University Library, the Faculty of Biology and Soil Sciences, the University Museum and the Mendeleev Museum, and other university offices. The campus also contains other facilities such as business offices, the University's swimming pool, the botanical garden. The newly established Smolny Monastery campus houses the Faculties of Sociology, International Relations, and Management. The Peterhof campus, located outside the city, includes the Faculties of Mathematics and Mechanics, the Faculty of Applied Mathematics and Control Processes, the Faculty of Chemistry, the Faculty of Physics, a number of scientific research institutes, and such other facilities as a student union, residence halls, a restaurant and shops.

Over 400 professors, 850 associate professors, and 7,500 assistant professors and teaching assistants are engaged at present in research and the teaching of over 20,000 undergraduate and 1,500 graduate students.

St. Petersburg State University is proud of its faculty scholarly achievements. A total of seven University graduates have won Nobel Prizes: Pavlov (1904), Mechnikov (1908), Semenov (1956), Landau (1962), Prokhorov (1964), Leontyev (1973), and Kantorovich (1975). Many faculty members have been recognized as State Prize winners. More than 600 University graduates are members of the Russian Academy of Sciences and other Russian and international academies. These numbers indicate that St. Petersburg State University is rightly considered one of the strongest teaching and research universities in Russia.
